---
title: The Wicked Witch of the World Wide Web
author:
  - Kiara Jouhanneau
created: 2026-01-23
share: true
note: scan Asma Mhalla's "Anti-Conclusion" and add it to appendix + add/update footnotes + try md2pagedjs for layout
---
# INTRODUCTION  
## <mark style="background: #D2B3FFA6;">1. Into the <del>spider</del> web</mark>  
Let’s first dive into the web itself, investigating web making as a craft, the importance of the gesture and the role of intention when making, creating.  
This is about intention being a key to craft and how I see magic and the web connecting to one another.  
#### 1.1 (find a pun around crafting)  
From the beginning of the web, Tim Berners-Lee, its inventor, viewed it as a way of connecting all the people of the world together and a great opportunity to expand creativity and imagination (Berners-Lee, T. (2025) This is for everyone. Macmillan, London).    
This idea took on quite rapidly, with the first net.artists[^1] rising as early as 1994 (the web itself was created in 1989 and made public in 1993!)    
Net.artists saw the potential of hyperlinks and inter-connectivity to create, the most active practitioner being Olia Lialina.   
In 2011, when HTML5 launched and eliminated frame elements, Lialina told VICE Creators’ Kathleen Flood that   
> “Many of my works were based on features that browser developers considered being bugs and were removing those bugs in newer versions, so, I have to find new tricks to keep them alive.”[^2]  
  
I believe this is a perfect definition of crafting; inflating life into ideas with the means at our disposal, adapt to change to maintain the unexpected, hack – in the sense of using inappropriate or unexpected means to create or perform an action.  
This notion of ‘unexpected’ is also important for the core of craft, I believe, is intention. A creator of any kind is not simply one that has an idea; turning that idea into reality requires the intention to act, in other words, to link the mind and the body together. An that is how the creator might conjure the unexpected: that intention of creation sparks from an idea, so it bears a certain shape (the sharpness of it not being important) and in the process of creation this creator might reach or give life to shapes that were not pictured, that were not expected. Sometimes, the unexpected reveals itself more interesting, inspiring, etc. than the original picture of the creator’s mind. That is when they will decide to nurture it. This is what Olia Lialina is explaining above.  
  
Crafting makes a lot of sense when speaking of website making for it is a form of expression, and as explained above, an art form. In her book Reading Writing Interfaces: From the Digital to the Bookbound (University of Minnesota Press 2014), Lori Emerson refers to crafting as experimentation:   
>“Learning through doing, tinkering, experimentation, trial-and-error is, then, how one comes to have a genuine computer literacy.”  
  
Crafting a website starts with a spark, an idea let’s say. Then, we act upon it to give life to that website. Every choice along the way is ruled by intention(s) and intuition(s). However, what differentiates web crafting from built-in drag-and-drop WYSIWYG[^3] website makers is attention. Attention to detail, to the public/audience, to the website itself. This is what Raphaël Bastide depicts in his performative piece being a script.     
> Before the first line in the diary of my existence, I am nothing. In fact, I am an intention, an empty document, but the air is full of me, I am there in a form that is vaporous, sweet, and naive. I will do everything, sort everything, as if by miracle, I am a formula, an appeal to the divine. Before everything begins, I wait for hands.    
> (Bastide, R. (2025) being a script. Available at: https://raphaelbastide.com/etre-script (Accessed: 22 October 2025).)  
  
In a conversation[^4] we had together, Raphaël told me about the creation process of this piece. How he started writing it during the first months of his newborn child, the role and place taken by the body and physical gestures in this process. He also told me about the questions at the heart of this creation:   
- a slow lack of interest for technicality that drives choices leaning towards a more human, emotional approach;   
- (how) can we operate a shift from machine learning technologies that deprive us from our creative capacities?;   
- a choice to put himself in the public/audience’s shoes in order to let go, to enact a discovery of his own work and evaluate its emotional reach.  
Those questions are all at least partly answered by the notion of caring. The moment we decide to build a web project, whether it be an entire website or a single page, we perform an act of care. We care for the project, for what it bears, for the web commons and the people that will interact with our creation. being a script is an ode to code, because to some extent, we also care for the code. This caring is quite particular, one might care for the code as a mode of expression, or as the bone of the project, or even in order for it to be readable and reusable by peers.    
Once we have built and decided to (take) care (for), we share. Sharing is beyond the creator, it is an agreement with the medium. The web is like a antique forum, the central place of the city, where people share all sorts of ideas. Web forums take their name from it. Sharing is inherent to the web, as it is using the Internet, connecting multiple computers (servers) and people together. And just as any art form, web crafting and net.art are created with a sharing intention. It can be to share the piece itself as a whole, the technique or medium, or something more abstract or personal, like a message, an idea, a world.  
  
This makes me reach the following conclusion: even the most stereotypical developer, having done their curriculum in programming, maths and engineering is making art, in the sense that they are writing, and the trial-and-error, drafting process is very similar to the one of art. On that note, it is more and more common to see these developers host Twitch live streams, thus becoming also content creators, performers, tutors.  
#### 1.2 Webrings and digital gardens: where the web becomes *magical*   
Back in its first years of life, the web did not have such “powerful” search engines and discovering new websites was more of a treasure hunt. To compensate for this lacking, web-makers created webrings: a script file was put in the code folder, containing a list of all members and a looping function, interlinking members to one another. Those early webrings were thematic: gardeners, fandoms, cooking websites, etc. It allowed visitors to discover other people having the same passions or interests.   
%% IMG: webrings examples %%  
  
For a few years now, webrings are showing up again, regaining popularity. Of course not for the same reason, but they still act as a very good discovery/connecting tool. This revival is linked to a movement of revolt, a common voice rising from the depths of the web: the indie web. It is a practice born from a desire of reclaiming the web space, taken over by big corporations (GAFAM[^5]). It relies on principles such as hand-written code, low-weight websites, F/LOSS[^6] and sharing.[^7] It advocates for personal websites as a form of expression, opposite to corporate-owned social media platforms, for they invite us to care about what we share and how.  
  
Another form of social webcraft is digital gardens. Maggie Appleton describes them:  
> They’re not following the conventions of the “personal blog”, as we’ve come to know it. Rather than presenting a set of polished articles, displayed in reverse chronological order, these sites act more like free form, work-in-progress wikis.    
> A garden is a collection of evolving ideas that aren’t strictly organised by their publication date. They’re inherently exploratory – notes are linked through contextual associations. They aren’t refined or complete – notes are published as half-finished thoughts that will grow and evolve over time. They’re less rigid, less performative, and less perfect than the personal websites we’re used to seeing.[^8]  
  
A digital garden is like a notebook, shared for other people to flip through.     
Here, we touch something interesting: one practice is very close to the one of clubs as in a book club, people gathering *around* a shared passion; the other takes gardening, an activity highly *centred* on care and patience, as a metaphor for its form.     
— But, Kiara, why is this interesting exactly?    
Well, it is quite simple really: both webrings and digital gardens rely on physical practices – linked to the senses –, transposed to the web. Almost as if the presence of the body was unconsciously needed by everyone online… ;)    
Additionally, both are seen as “magical” or enchanting, creating a feeling of amazement for they seem to pertain to an outside world and tend to be poetical or…playful!  
That poetry and playfulness was actually already explored by Olia Lialina, as described on artsy.net:  
> “In 1996, her browser-based piece My Boyfriend Came Back From The War made her a notable pioneer of internet art. Her click-to-reveal storyline about reunited lovers was built on HTML frames, a newly-released feature that let developers put multiple pages in one browser. She wasn’t just translating a story onto the internet, she was telling a story in the language of the web browser”[^9].  
  
%% IMG: My Boyfriend Came Back From The War + Summer %%  
  
*Telling a story with the language of the web* – I find this quite beautiful and very *à propos* as web poetry is also its own art form.   
Poetry can be both verbal and visual, giving way to the creation of websites that highlight written poetry, websites that use CSS do depict a poetical atmosphere… and even creators exploring the poetry of HTML and CSS as languages!   
Doriane Timmermans, artist and researcher based in Brussels, is one of them. Her research project declarations[^10] is exploring the materiality of CSS as a language. Together, we talked about how CSS and spell or ritual writing relate; she said “the CSS selector `:not(:focus):hover` is like an incantation that could be super powerful and bears heavy intentions.” We also mentioned browser extensions, especially the ones that “metamorphose the web through a simple CSS formula”[^11], uniting, in that sense, magic and hacking.  
  
In my mind, magic is a process: an intuition becomes intention, that intention is being realised through whatever physical means we like. The whole process involves, requires a connection and listening to our own emotions and feelings, to acknowledge what is within ourselves as much as what lies in our surroundings.   
Intention is the key, it is what will make one say certain words, act a certain way. It injects politics in things. That same intention should be, I believe, at the core of the act of making. As mentioned earlier, magic is a process and this process can be applied to any aspect of our lives.   
Though it may seem to be a completely unrelated discipline, magic is also full of crafting. From the most obvious love potion to the most mystical meditation, every practice involves the body (sometimes also one of a channelling person, usually the “magic” person (e.g. fortune teller)) and sometimes even some specific gestures to reproduce or enhance the power of intention.  
  
We can pull on that rope and reach analogies between web craft and magic craft – referring once again to practices pertaining to ritual/spell casting.    
- Webrings & magic circles: both use the circle shape and its attributes of constant sharing and flow, thus serving as ways of gathering and performing (magic circles perform a ritual, webrings perform a community).    
- Digital gardens & books of spells and potions: collections of writings and experimentations that can be passed on and modified through time, acting as recipes, guides and heritage.    
They are thus completely made by and for (a) community.    
To my knowledge, the most extensive depiction of that statement is what Daniel Murray, a.k.a melonking, built. Having started to build his own corner of the web in 2016, he now gathers hundreds of people on ‘MelonLand‘. His digital world includes his website, a forum, multiple webrings, a wiki, and more.   
In a interview he gave to Kendal Beynon he describes the ‘Everyone Site’, a feature of MelonLand:  
> This came out of a workshop that I did in Brussels with Doriane Timmermans[^12]. At the workshop, we were doing experiments through the open-source online editor Etherpad. I was working with Karl Moubarak[^13] from the collective Hackers and Designers[^14]. He came up with this system where we could write JavaScript in the Etherpad and it would inject the JavaScript directly into a browser extension, which meant that you could basically collectively write code that could morph how people's browsers worked. It was a complete security nightmare, but I thought that was a really exciting idea. The Everyone Site (eSite) is essentially that idea of collective programming applied to a web server and moderated by the forums community.    
> Beynon, K. and Murray, D. (2025) ‘Web craft: an interview with Daniel Murray’, The Photographers’ Gallery: Unthinking Photography. Available at: https://unthinking.photography/articles/webcraft-an-interview-with-daniel-murray.  
  
%% –> this needs some conclusion!! %%  
## <mark style="background: #ABF7F7A6;">2. The ghost in the shell, a tale about efficiency</mark>  
I will dive into the design systems used by big corporations, that in the end define the overall look of websites.   
This part will largely analyse the performance of efficiency that is spreading around the web and how following trends is making our identities disappear.  
#### 2.1 Templates and polishing: performance, technicality and productivity   
Taking on graphic design and layout techniques that have been used since the advent of printing, the web relied on template almost as soon as it was born. In its early years, with the arrival of CSS and then Geocities, webmakers expressed their personalities and created atmospheres, using themes on top of templates: as Nolwenn Maudet describes it in her article Design Templates Between Empowerment and Control of Amateur Graphic Designers, templates organise the content’s structure and standardise whereas themes offer a “graphical ambiance” (Maudet, 2025) and the “choices [for a theme] are less about functional graphic design and more about (personal) branding.” (Maudet, 2025)  
Unfortunately though, this didn’t last long as CMSs began to flourish. In a logic of capitalisation and to draw a maximum of people to use their services, CMSs began by mimicking big companies’ layouts.  
> “The growing adoption of CMS contributed to the intensification of “templatization” of pages and their homogenization in a feedback loop where users’ habituation to certain site architectures leads them to prefer that architecture, further reinforcing its adoption and deployment on other sites.” (Maudet, 2025)  
  
With that, over the last two decades, the web has become more and more standardised, to a point where website-building platforms “obliterate the more vernacular aesthetics that can emerge when amateur designers are left to their own devices.” (Maudet, 2025)  
From the globalisation of Instagram aesthetics – polished, flawless photos that depict perfect settings of smooth skins – to the layout of websites – a gridified, aiming for clarity template, induced by the popularisation of WYSIWYG website builders such as wix.com or canva.com – the webspace is drowning more and more into a seamless, polished, personality-lacking visual identity.  
  
I see this phenomenon as driven by a desire for:  
- performance, hence the creation of User Experience (UX) as a way of driving the navigation of a website into a certain direction;  
- productivity, with for example the 3-clicks rule, stating that if a visitor has to use more than 3 clicks to access the content they’re looking for on a website, it is not worth their time;  
- technicality, with the use of shady methods to design websites: frameworks and libraries, JavaScript generated HTML or closed databases.  
The merge of those 3 pillars is Search Engine Optimisation (SEO), moz.com defines it as: “the practice of improving your website's content, structure, and visibility to rank higher on search engines like Google.”[^2], basically meaning it is a set of `<meta>` tags so you have a bigger chance to appear on that so praised first page of search results.  
%% IMG: html meta for seo %%  
  
This is a fully capitalistic mode of action; big corporations set rules that aim to ensure them money gain, and smaller companies or individuals are left with no other choice than “following the trend”. This makes it very hard for independent artists or beginners to make room for their practice. They remain out of the first page of search results, invisible, shadow-banned[^1] in a way.   
Those implicit rules are set so hard in stone that they have been going on for more than 20 years, enforced by the rules of the website-building platforms. For example, wix.com expects that the template “follows the good practices of of UX/UI design and the trends of its field”[^3].   
  
Since 2020, the web is witnessing a new rise of experimental websites. Neocities, the proud successor to Geocities, is getting more and more popular, Tumblr never really fell down in spite of its numerous dramas, small website builders are also flowering all over the web. The general tiredness towards polished and seamless websites that all look the same, as well as towards the ownership of the webspace put in the hands of a few big tech companies has opened a door to rebellion.  
Unfortunately, that same tiredness has also lead way to the global use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) tools. Those generators produced images using overly saturated colours, abstract or hyper-realistic shapes that offer a seamingly good alternative to smooth grid/Instagram-like visuals.  
The issue with that is that those tools actually follow the same rules and objectives: performance, productivity and technicality, using shady methods. Besides the disastrous impact GenAI-producing companies have on the environment, the economy and human ethics, they also rely on manipulation and gas-lighting to achieve their goals.  
  
By merging GenAI and WYSIWYG website-makers, we face more and more templates that don’t even need to be edited, as the user will be able to generate their own content through an AI bot. The result of this is what Cory Doctorow calls “the enshittification of the web”:  
> “So what’s enshittification and why did it catch fire? It’s my theory explaining how the internet was colonized by platforms, and why all those platforms are degrading so quickly and thoroughly, and why it matters — and what we can do about it.” (Doctorow, C. (2024) ‘My McLuhan lecture on enshittification’, Medium, 30 January. Available at: https://doctorow.medium.com/my-mcluhan-lecture-on-enshittification-ea343342b9bc (Accessed: 17 February 2026).)  
  
Not only GenAI is perpetuating a toxic environment where a few billionaires can take all our data and communities hostage, it is also stealing and reshaping the whole (western) shared imagination around magic.  
From the beginning, GenAI has been introduced as “magical”. The whole communication/advertising plan of those companies relies on a saturation and over-use of symbols and analogies. In a research paper written collectively by Nolwenn Maudet, Annaëlle Beignon and Thibault Thomas for Limites Numériques, they list the various graphical elements pertaining to magic used by AI programs (the sparkle icon ✨, blue-mauve gradients), but also the mechanics shared by both disciplines: invisibilisation of the processes, grey-areas (as in different companies using the same icon for a multitude of unrelated functionalities). They conclude that analysis by saying:  
> We don't know how should behave something magic : is it normal that it takes time ? Did I do something wrong ? Is its resources consumption justified ? Making the machine invisible through the metaphor of magic changes the relation people have to tools. It is not possible anymore to pay attention to the machine. (Limites Numériques, 2025)  
  
Behind that sparkly and attractive image, GenAI hide all the horrors of their work: slavery and abuse, energy and resource consumption, plagiarism, etc. Therefore, I draw a direct comparison between GenAIs and stage magicians: they pass tricks and optical illusion for magic, but they really are a smokescreen, manipulating minds to believe their technique is actual magic. If any AI program is "magical" it is merely a trick on the mind, making its user (audience) believe something is happening when it actually is a smokescreen. If its "magic" comes from the fact that "we do not quite understand what it does and how" it is because it advertised as making things easier and faster than a human. However, as Dominique Cardon writes, “Algorithms that claim to be predictive are not predictive because they have managed to penetrate people's subjectivity to fathom their desires or aspirations. They are predictive because they constantly assume that our future will be a reproduction of our past.”[^4]  
Yet when dressed up as a magical entity GenAI seems to be looked upon as a good thing, leaving behind any reference to intention, intuition, emotion; in opposition a hand crafted website therefore acts as a counter-spell, by the fact that we can inspect, replicate and adapt its code, thus understanding it, learning and becoming able to recognise and shape our own intentions.  
#### 2.2 Losing our identity: paradoxes and automation   
%% → this part is too short!! (add 300 words somehow) %%  
With that grand homogenisation of the web visual land, we face a paradox of wanting to stand out and blending in. We often see people, mainly artists of any field, complaining and struggling. But they might come from any end of the spectrum: those who decided to embrace the flow and the standards blend so much that by looking like anyone else’s their portfolios remain unseen; those who on the contrary decide to go for a very personal portfolio will be so different and crafty that they are not pushed forward by algorithm, remaining in the underground scene or invisible. That paradox makes it harder and harder for artists and creators to make a living and is getting all the more emphasised by GenAIs, as anyone can label themselves artists even if their creations are those of the calculations of a machine.  
   
Besides that paradox, another concept is bringing us to a loss or confusion of our identity and singularity: automation.  
In her article Algorithms vs Interaction Design, Nolwenn Maudet explains that AI designers aim to anticipate our intentions, which would then lead to “automating everything, eliminating all interaction”. This would be very deplorable as the web is all about interaction: servers (computers) interacting with one another, users also, and the whole field of Human-Computer interaction. By removing interaction through the anticipation of intentions, we stop thinking, for all is automated and done before we even think about it. Let’s not forget the brain is a muscle and thinking, reflecting is its exercising…  
Additionally, in her article When we walk away from the lying machines (2026), Margaret Killjoy explains the shift in our collective way of thinking that might be operated by the growing usage of GenAI: the current generation of people believe what they see online is true, we have been taught to believe evidence when we see it with our own eyes. However, more and more content is being machine-generated and fed to us, so our very perception of reality is challenged. She writes: “A child born today will never experience a world in which there is any reason to believe that realistic images, video, or audio represent reality, or that a person wrote the words that they read. Instead of presuming any photo-realistic image (or credible-sounding audio) is real unless proven otherwise, they might simply assume that every image and text was generated by the monstrous lying machines that sit in warehouses just outside our cities and suck up all our water and power.” (Killjoy, 2026)  
Thus, what makes the web human will be gone.   
%%  Short sidenote, not sure to be included:  
Numerous science-fictions pieces continue to explore the notions of cyberpunk and a futuristic era where machines take over. Yet, I have not heard of any exploring what might happen is the web became this place of distrust and fakeness.%%  
Of course, as M. Killjoy also writes, this shift might very well lead us back to embracing more face-to-face interactions, with other human beings, which would be quite positive. But I believe we can also act now, as communities, so that neither the web nor our *in real life* interactions disappear.  
## <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">3. Reclaiming: a fight for our future</mark>  
#### 3.1 Cyberpunk: aesthetics vs ideology  
What ifs and potentialities are a big deal of our imagination capacities. All that is forging in the various domains of technology nowadays seems to be trying to give life to science-fiction (or science-fiction writers are true visionaries). As Asma Mhalla explains in the beginning of her essay Cyberpunk : Le nouveau totalitarisme, the future is here, we are living the cyberpunk dystopia depicted in so many science-fiction scenario since the 1980s. The all-automated, machine-centred and efficiency-driven future is actually the present we are building (Mhalla, 2025). Only, cyberpunk isn’t just a skin-pack coating everything in CMYK-saturated colours and body implants, it comes with an ideology, politics.  
Mhalla carefully unveils the mechanics at play in the cyberpunk ideology of our days, building her analysis on the recent events that occurred in US politics.  
She explains thoroughly how deeply rooted in technology those events are, relying on a president that has only faith in the sparkly, the shocking and the show. Donald Trump is the ultimate stage magician, who took Elon Musk as his assistant for a while, stating his motives and interests in AI programming and machine governance.   
  
“So, in short, cybernetics went into arts and science fiction and they invented stuff and said "it will be great in the future". But maybe we should really think about stories we believe in. We shouldn't ignore so many facts. AI is using huge amounts of energy, water, and human lives. And they gave us that story that AI will solve the climate crisis. And this is like trying to extinguish a fire with diesel. You can try it.  
So, please, be an adult, like stories, but do not confuse them with reality and be an adult, break something to make it stop.”  
#### 3.2 Fun against totalitarianism   
The state of the web is currently unstable, taken over by big Silicon Valley corporation, pushing AI slop in everything, until we all become numb. In her article From the Philosophy of the Open to the Ideology of the User-Friendly, Lori Emerson explains how computers used to be accessible to their users, offering the possibility to become hardware-savvy, and how through time, they become less and less operable and changeable, thus turning into mysterious black boxes that we expect to just work. This system is creating the great seamlessness, valuing templates and drag-and-drop website makers instead of the craft of HTML and CSS, mentioned before.   
In addition, we’re always compelled and pushed to find purpose, to have a reason, a use for everything we say and make. That’s the principle of design; art with an applied function. That is terribly sad. It always made me feel like an outcast, because sometimes it is very nice to do things because we appreciate them or because they ‘feel right’. So let’s embrace the useless, for the sake of fun.   
As Johan Huizinga demonstrates in his book Homo Ludens, play is an inherent part of life and losing playfulness gives way to seriousness, leading to extreme political situations. Meaning that in order to fight those political crises, we need to embrace playfulness.  
  
While working on a translation job for howtotrainyourchatbot.org i came across the phrase: "You will see a question with two answer options generated by the model, and pick what you think is **the better answer**. Real chatbots similarly **learn patterns** from thousands of choices **made by humans**, often <b>workers hired for this task</b>. What counts as 'better' depends on who's deciding." and that made me think; what GenAI **cannot** do is create, have imagination. It recycles and remixes already realised ideas. It plagiarises and steals. So as humans, our so endeared singularity is to some extent our imagination. It is our capacity to create useless things, for their beauty or their level of fun. People designing GenAI tools (Musk, Altman, etc.) are driven by profit and use, functionality, performance. Here’s another fact given on howtotrainyourchatbot.org: “Artificial intelligence denotes the capacity of computational systems to exhibit adaptive, goal-oriented behavior akin to cognitive processes observed in human intelligence”.  
Therefore these tools cannot conceive the importance of the useless. Making the useless and the goofy preferred counter-action to their political agenda.  
  
— But, Kiara, what is this mysterious political agenda?  
Excellent question! Let me explain starting with a quote from Katika Kühnreich in a talk she gave during 39C3:  
> “Stories can help us, give us guidelines, hope. Can make us believe that if we follow that story's rules, everything will be easy. But we have to be careful what kind of stories we believe in.  
> Because fascism is a story.  
> And sometimes it's very well told. And cybernetics is a story as well. A mechanical fairy tale.”  
  
With this statement, Kühnreich ties cybernetics and fascism together. During this talk, she demonstrates further this statement by explaining that, in her own words, fascism “promises you to go back to a past that never existed. And they tell you it will be grand. Fascism provides you with a community that is paid for by the blood of others. Because the only community fascism knows is ‘we are better than them’.”   
To me, this is also exactly what big tech does: trying to give life to science-fiction, promising it will solve all our problems and creating a fake community gathered around productivity, lies, unethical practices, thinking they’re doing the right thing.  
  
  
“And have fun doing it. This is a duty you can do with others. There is no rule that anti-fascism can't be danced.”  
“Let's pack, put the fun back into anti-fascism, and create a good world.”  
  
## CONCLUSION